Mc doc improvements (#1123)
netdata/learn: docs/cloud/insights/metric-correlations.md

custom_edit_url: https://github.com/netdata/learn/blob/master/docs/cloud/insights/metric-correlations.md
---

The Metric Correlations (MC) feature lets you quickly find metrics and charts related to a particular window of interest that you want to explore further. By displaying the standard Netdata dashboard, filtered to show only charts that are relevant to the window of interest, you can get to the root cause sooner.

Because Metric Correlations uses every available metric from that node, with as high as 1-second granularity, you get the most accurate insights using every possible metric.

## Using Metric Correlations

When viewing the single-node dashboard, the **Metric Correlations** button appears in top right corner of the page.

> ![The Metric Correlations button in a single-node dashboard](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2178292/181750606-4dd5f216-ec83-46c9-92f8-b307264bfd9a.png)

Reviewer: I know visuals are always helpful but I think @DShreve2 was trying to move away from having images/GIFs on the docs.
The main reason for that is that with any change that happens on the UI it would almost for sure trigger a docs review

Author: yeah i just could not leave the old one that is there in there as is :) 

I kinda think its better to have images in the docs to make the docs better (imagine trying to explain how to trgigger MC from toolbar in text lol) even if they might end a little outdated. If that happens it means we are buidling stuff and not also thinking about the docs which i think is bad. 

We change something then just updating the relevant docs shoudl also include the images.

So i see both sides but on balance i dont think just not including images is really a solution.

@DShreve2 i guess something to put into the mix as part of the ongoing docs work maybe. 

I think maybe keeping images to a minimum or where 100% needed maybe could be a good balance perhaps?

Reviewer 2: I think a simple image to point out how to trigger the functionality would definitely be useful.

Reviewer: probably a .gif here would make more sense then, no?

> To start correlating metrics, click the **Metric Correlations** button, then hold the `Alt` key (or `⌘` on macOS) and click-and-drag a selection of metrics on a single chart. The selected timeframe needs to be at least 15 seconds for Metric Correlation to work best. 

Reviewer 2: works best? should this just say work. I think we show a message asking the user to select at least 15 seconds if they don't.

Author: correct

Author: done

> The menu then displays information about the selected area and reference baseline. Metric Correlations uses the reference baseline to discover which additional metrics are most closely connected to the selected metrics.

Reviewer 2: Is it self evident what a "reference baseline" is to a user who reads this?

Author: no - feel free to make suggestions i can just press a button in here to commit :)

Author: added a sentence for this

> Press the **Find Correlations** button to start up the correlations service, the button is only enabled when a valid timeframe is selected (at least 15 seconds). Once pressed, the service will score all available metrics on your node and returns a filtered version of the Netdata dashboard. Now, you'll see only those metrics that have changed the most between a baseline window and the highlighted window you have selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Press the **Find Correlations** button to start up the correlations process, the button is only enabled when a valid timeframe is selected (at least 15 seconds). Once pressed, the process will score all available metrics on your node and returns a filtered version of the Netdata dashboard. Now, you'll see only those metrics that have changed the most between a baseline window and the highlighted window you have selected.
```

was thinking that service was mostly implying our correlations service that we had in Cloud, but also not so sure if `process` is the bet alternative

![Metric Correlations results](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2178292/181751182-25e0890d-a5f4-4799-9936-1523603cf97d.png)

These charts are fully interactive, and whenever possible, will only show the _dimensions_ related to the timeline you selected.

You can interact with all the scored metrics via the slider. Slide toward **show less** for more nuanced and significant results, or toward **show more** to "loosen" the threshold to explore other charts that may have changed too, but in a less significant manner.

If you find something else interesting in the results, you can select another window and press **Find Correlations** again to kick the process off again.

## Metric Correlations options

MC enables a few input parameters that users can define to iteratively explore their data in different ways. As is usually the case in Machine Learning (ML), there is no "one size fits all" algorithm, what approach works best will typically depend on the type of data (which can be very different from one metric to the next) and even the nature of the event or incident you might be exploring in Netdata.

> So by when you first run MC it will use the most sensible and general defaults. But you can also then vary any of the below options to explore further.

Reviewer 2: remove "by"

Author: make suggestion instead of comment :)

### Method

> Their are two algorithms available that aim to score metrics based on how much they have changed between the baseline and highlight windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two algorithms available that aim to score metrics based on how much they have changed between the baseline and highlight windows.
```

- `KS2` - A statistical test ([Two-sample Kolmogorov Smirnov](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolmogorov%E2%80%93Smirnov_test#Two-sample_Kolmogorov%E2%80%93Smirnov_test)) comparing the distribution of the highlighted window to the baseline to try and quantify which metrics have most evidence of a significant change. You can explore our implementation [here](https://github.com/netdata/netdata/blob/d917f9831c0a1638ef4a56580f321eb6c9a88037/database/metric_correlations.c#L212).

> - `Volume` -  A heuristic measure based on the percentage change in averages between highlighted window and baseline, with various edges cases sensibly controlled for. You can explore our implementation [here](https://github.com/netdata/netdata/blob/d917f9831c0a1638ef4a56580f321eb6c9a88037/database/metric_correlations.c#L516).

Author: @ktsaou feel free to update or change this as you know most about this method.

> - `Volume` -  A heuristic measure based on the percentage change in averages between highlighted window and baseline, with various edges cases sensibly controlled for. You can explore our implementation [here](https://github.com/netdata/netdata/blob/d917f9831c0a1638ef4a56580f321eb6c9a88037/database/metric_correlations.c#L516).

Reviewer 3: "edges cases" -> "edge cases"

### Aggregation

> Behind the scenes Netdata will aggregate the raw data as needed such that arbitrary window lengths can be selected for MC. By default Netdata will just `Average` raw data when needed as part of pre-processing. However other aggregations like `Median`, `Min`, `Max`, `Stddev` are also possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Behind the scenes, Netdata will aggregate the raw data as needed such that arbitrary window lengths can be selected for MC. By default, Netdata will just `Average` raw data when needed as part of pre-processing. However other aggregations like `Median`, `Min`, `Max`, `Stddev` are also possible.
```

### Data

> Netdata is different than typical observability agents in that in addition to just collecting raw metric values, it will by default also assign an "[Anomaly Bit](/docs/agent/ml#anomaly-bit)" related to each collected metric each second that is a 0 for "normal" and 1 for "anomalous". This means that each metric also natively has an "[Anomaly Rate](/docs/agent/ml#anomaly-rate)" associated with it and as such MC can be ran against the raw metric values or their corresponding anomaly rates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Netdata is different than typical observability agents since, in addition to just collecting raw metric values, it will by default also assign an "[Anomaly Bit](/docs/agent/ml#anomaly-bit)" related to each collected metric each second. This bit will be 0 for "normal" and 1 for "anomalous". This means that each metric also natively has an "[Anomaly Rate](/docs/agent/ml#anomaly-rate)" associated with it and, as such, MC can be run against the raw metric values or their corresponding anomaly rates.
```

#### Enabling/Disabling Metric Correlations on the agent

As of `v1.35.0-22-nightly` metric correlations has been enabled by default on all agents. After further optimizations to the implementation, the impact of running the metric correlations algorithim on the agent was less than the impact of preparing all the data to send to cloud for MC to run in the cloud, as such running MC on the agent is less impactful on local resources than running via cloud.

Should you still want to, disabling nodes for Metric Corrleation on the agent is a simple one line config change. Just set `enable metric correlations = no` in the `[global]` section of `netdata.conf`

> ## Usage tips!

Author: @cakrit fyi - added a usage tips section.

Reviewer 3: I'd restructure as follows and add charts showing what we're talking about.

- Use the `Volume` algorithm for metrics with a lot of gaps (e.g. request latency when there are few requests), otherwise stick with `KS2`
  - By default, Netdata uses the `KS2` algorithm which is a tried and tested method for change detection in a lot of domains. The [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolmogorov%E2%80%93Smirnov_test) article gives a good overview of how this works. Basically, it is comparing, for each metric, its cumulative distribution in the highlight window with its cumulative distribution in the baseline window. The statistical test then seeks to quantify the extent to which we can say these two distributions look similar enough to be considered the same or not. The `Volume` algorithm is a bit more simple than `KS2` in that it basically compares (with some edge cases sensibly handled) the average value of the metric across baseline and highlight and looks at the percentage change. Often both `KS2` and `Volume` will have significant agreement and return similar metrics.
  - `Volume` might favour picking up more sparse metrics that were relatively flat and then came to life with some spikes (or vice versa). This is because for such metrics that just don't have that many different values in them, it is impossible to construct cumulative distribution's that can then be compared. So `Volume` might be useful in spotting examples of metrics turning on or off. [ADD EXAMPLE CHART BELOW HERE]
  - `KS2` since it relies on the full distribution might be better at highlighting more complex changes that `Volume` is unable to capture. For example a change in the variation of a metric might be picked up easily by `KS2` but missed (or just much lower scored) by `Volume` since the averages might remain not all that different between baseline and highlight even if their variance has changed a lot. [ADD EXAMPLE CHART BELOW HERE]
- Use `Volume` and `Anomaly Rate` together to ask what metrics have turned most anomalous from baseline to highlighted window. You can expand the embedded anomaly rate chart once you have results to see this more clearly. [ADD EXAMPLE CHART BELOW HERE]

Author: i like this and idea of showing a sort of illustrative example chart.

Author: done - i think it is better with the illustrative charts too.

> - By default Netdata uses the `KS2` algorithm which is a tried and tested method for change detection in a lot of domains. The [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolmogorov%E2%80%93Smirnov_test) article gives a good overview of how this works. Basically, it is comparing, for each metric, its cumulative distribution in the highlight window with its cumulative distribution in the baseline window. The statistical test then seeks to quantify the extent to which we can say these two distributions look similar enough to be considered the same or not.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- By default, Netdata uses the `KS2` algorithm which is a tried and tested method for change detection in a lot of domains. The [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolmogorov%E2%80%93Smirnov_test) article gives a good overview of how this works. Basically, it is comparing, for each metric, its cumulative distribution in the highlight window with its cumulative distribution in the baseline window. The statistical test then seeks to quantify the extent to which we can say these two distributions look similar enough to be considered the same or not.  
```
